THE BASICS OF NUTRITION AND FOOD SCIENCE 




29 








FUNCTION OF COOKING FATS 


Depending on their molecular structure, some fats are 
solid at room temperature, while others are liquid at the 
same temperature. Fats that are liquid at room temper¬ 
ature are known as oils. Solid fats soften and eventually 
melt into a liquid state when exposed to heat. 


In addition to being a vital nutrient, fat performs a 
number of culinary functions. It provides a rich flavor 
and silky mouthfeel or texture that most people find 
very enjoyable and satisfying. Fat also carries and 
blends the flavors of other foods, and makes available 
to us flavor compounds and nutrients that are soluble 
only in fat. Fat provides an appealing visual element 
when a food appears, among other things, to be moist, 
creamy, fluffy, or shiny. During the baking process, fat 
performs a multitude of chemical functions such as 
tenderizing, leavening, aiding in moisture retention, 
and creating a flaky or crumbly texture. In cooking, fat 
transfers heat to foods and prevents them from stick¬ 
ing. It also holds the heat in food, emulsifies or thickens 
sauces, and creates a crisp texture when used for frying. 


One important aspect of fat is its ability to be heated 
to relatively high temperatures without boiling or oth¬ 
erwise breaking down. This is what allows fried foods to 
brown and cook quickly. If heated to high enough tem¬ 
peratures, however, fat will begin to break down and de¬ 
velop an acrid flavor, effectively ruining anything cooked 
in it. The temperature at which this occurs, known as the 
smoke point, is different for each fat. Generally, veg¬ 
etable oils begin to smoke around 450°F/232°C, while 
animal fats begin to smoke around 375°F/191°C. Any 




additional materials in the fat (emulsifiers, preserva¬ 
tives, proteins, carbohydrates) lower the smoke point. 
Because some breakdown occurs at moderate tem¬ 
peratures and food particles tend to get left in the fat, 
repeated use of fat also lowers the smoke point. 


FORMING EMULSIONS 


An emulsion occurs when two substances that do not 
normally mix are forced into a mixture in which one of 
the substances is evenly dispersed in the form of small 
droplets throughout the other. Under normal conditions, 
fat (either liquid oil or solid fat) and water do not mix, 
but these two substances are the most common ingredi¬ 
ents in culinary emulsions. 


An emulsion consists of two phases, the dispersed 
phase and the continuous phase. A vinaigrette is an 
example of an oil-in-vinegar emulsion, meaning that 
the oil (the dispersed phase) has been broken up into 
very small droplets suspended throughout the vinegar 
(the continuous phase). Temporary emulsions, such as 
vinaigrettes, form quickly and require only the mechani¬ 
cal action of whipping, shaking, or stirring. To make an 
emulsion stable enough to keep the oil in suspension, 
additional ingredients, known as emulsifiers, are neces¬ 
sary to attract and hold together both the oil and liquid. 
Commonly used emulsifiers include egg yolks (which 
contain the emulsifier lecithin), mustard, and glace 
de viande. Natural starches, such as those in garlic, or 
modified starches, such as cornstarch or arrowroot, are 
also used.