food science basics 




There are dozens of scientific principles at work dur¬ 
ing the cooking process. As an introduction to the topic 
of food science, this section provides an overview of 
the most basic of these principles. For more informa¬ 
tion on any of the following subjects, refer to Readings 
and Resources (page 1185) for a list of food science 
references. 


HEATTRANSFER 


Cooking is the act of applying heat to foods to prepare 
them for eating. When foods are cooked, changes in fla¬ 
vor, texture, aroma, color, and nutritional content occur 
during the process. 


There are three ways that heat is transferred to 
foods. Conduction is the direct transfer of heat between 
adjacent molecules. An example of conduction is cook¬ 
ing on a flattop range. Heat is transferred from the mol¬ 
ecules of the hot range surface to the molecules of the 
adjacent pan bottom, then from the pan bottom to the 
pan sides and the food contained within the pan. The pan 
must be in direct contact with the range for conduction 
to occur. 


Some materials are better conductors of heat than 
others. Generally, most metals are good conductors, 
while gases (air), liquids, and nonmetallic solids (glass, 
ceramic) are not. Because it relies on direct contact, 
conduction is a relatively slow method of heat transfer, 
but the slow, direct transfer of heat between adjacent 
molecules is what allows a food to be cooked from the 
outside in, resulting in a completely cooked exterior 
with a moist and juicy interior. 


Convection is the transfer of heat through gases or 
liquids. When either of these substances is heated, the 




portion of the gas or liquid closest to the heat source 
warms first and becomes less dense, causing it to rise 
and be replaced by cooler, denser portions of the gas or 
liquid. Convection, therefore, is a combination of con¬ 
duction and mixing. 


Convection occurs both naturally and through me¬ 
chanical means. Natural convection is at work in a pot of 
water placed on the stove to boil. Conduction transfers 
heat from the stove to the pot to the water molecules in 
contact with the interior of the pot. As these water mol¬ 
ecules heat up, convection causes them to move away 
and be replaced by cooler molecules. This continual 
movement results in convection currents within the 
water. If a potato is added to the water, the convection 
currents transfer heat to the surface of the potato, at 
which point conduction takes over to transfer heat to 
the interior of the potato. 


Mechanical convection occurs when stirring or a fan 
is used to speed and equalize heat distribution. When 
you stir a thick sauce to heat it faster and keep it from 
scorching on the bottom of the pan, you are creating me¬ 
chanical convection. Convection ovens use fans to rap¬ 
idly circulate hot air, allowing them to cook foods more 
quickly and evenly than conventional ovens. (Natural 
convection occurs in conventional ovens as air in contact 
with the heating element circulates, but the majority 
of heat transfer in a conventional oven is the result of 
infrared radiation.) 


Radiation is the transfer of energy through waves 
of electromagnetic energy that travel rapidly through 
space. Radiation does not require direct contact be¬ 
tween the energy source and food. When the waves 
traveling through space strike matter and are ab¬ 
sorbed, they cause molecules in the matter to vibrate 




SIX BASIC PRINCIPLES OF FOOD SCIENCE 


I Understanding how food reacts under certain conditions is essential to becoming a profes¬ 


sional chef. From creating a flavorful dish to developing an innovative shortcut, chefs face 
challenges every day. The six basic principles of food science are as follows: 


Caramelization Maillard reaction 


Gelatinization Denaturation 


Coagulation Emulsification 




chapters » THE BASICS OF NUTRITION AND FOOD SCIENCE 




27 








more rapidly, increasing the temperature. Two types 
of radiation are important in the kitchen: infrared and 
microwave. 


Sources of infrared radiation include the glowing 
coals of a charcoal grill or the glowing coils of an elec¬ 
tric toaster, broiler, or oven. Waves of radiant energy 
travel in all directions from these heat sources. Foods 
and cookware that absorb the energy waves are heated. 
Dark, dull, or rough surfaces absorb radiant energy bet¬ 
ter than light-colored, polished, or smooth surfaces. 
Transparent glass permits the transfer of radiant en¬ 
ergy, so conventional oven temperatures should be low¬ 
ered by approximately 25°F/14°C from convection oven 
settings to offset the additional energy transfer that 
occurs when using glass baking dishes. 


Microwave radiation, produced by microwave ovens, 
transfers energy through short high-frequency waves. 
When these microwaves are absorbed by food, they 
cause the food molecules to vibrate faster, creating 
heat. Microwave radiation cooks food much faster than 
infrared radiation because it penetrates foods several 
inches deep, whereas infrared is mainly absorbed at the 
surface. Depending on their composition, foods react 
differently to microwaves. Foods with high moisture, 
sugar, or fat content absorb microwaves best and heat 
up more readily. 


Microwave cooking has a few drawbacks, however. It 
is best suited to cooking small batches of foods. Meats 
cooked in a microwave oven lose greater amounts of 
moisture and easily become dry. Microwave ovens also 




cannot brown foods, and metal cannot be used in them 
because it reflects the microwaves, which can cause 
fires and damage the oven. 


EFFECTS OF HEAT ON SUGARS AND 
STARCHES: Caramelization, Maillard Reaction, 
and Gelation 


As discussed earlier in this chapter, carbohydrates come 
in various forms, and each form reacts differently when 
exposed to heat. The two forms of carbohydrates (sim¬ 
ple and complex) that are of interest from a basic food 
science perspective are sugar and starch. 


When exposed to heat, sugar will at first melt into 
a thick syrup. As its temperature continues to rise, 
the sugar syrup changes color from clear to light yel¬ 
low to a progressively deepening brown. This browning 
process is called caramelization. It is a complicated 
chemical reaction, and in addition to color change, it 
also causes the flavor of the sugar to evolve and take on 
the rich complexity that we know to be characteristic 
of caramel. Different types of sugar caramelize at dif¬ 
ferent temperatures. Granulated white sugar melts at 
320°F/160°C and begins to caramelize at 338°F/170°C. 


In foods that are not primarily sugar or starch, a 
different reaction, known as the Maillard reaction , is 
responsible for browning. This reaction involves sugars 
and amino acids (the building blocks of protein). When 
heated, these components react and produce numerous 
chemical by-products, resulting in a brown color and 
intense flavor and aroma. It is this reaction that gives 




INDUCTION COOKING 




Induction cooking is a relatively new cook¬ 
ing method that transfers heat through 
a specially designed cooktop made of a 
smooth ceramic material over an induc¬ 
tion coil. The induction coil creates a 
magnetic current that causes a metal pan 
on the cooktop to heat up quickly, yet the 
cooktop itself remains cool. Heat is then 
transferred to the food in the pan through 
conduction. Cookware used for induction 
cooking must be flat on the bottom for 




good contact with the cooktop, and it must 
be made of ferrous (iron-containing) metal 
such as cast iron, magnetic stainless steel, 
or enamel over steel. Cookware made of 
other materials will not heat up on these 
cooktops. Induction cooking offers the ad¬ 
vantages of rapid heating and easy cleanup 
because there are no nooks on the smooth 
surface of the cooktop in which spilled 
foods can get stuck, nor does spilled food 
cook on the cool surface. 




28 




THE CULINARY PROFESSIONAL 








coffee, chocolate, baked goods, dark beer, and roasted 
meats and nuts much of their rich flavor and color. 


Though the Maillard reaction can happen at room 
temperature, both caramelization and the Maillard 
reaction typically require relatively high heat (above 
300°F/149°C) to occur rapidly enough to make an ap¬ 
preciable difference in foods. Because water cannot be 
heated above 212°F/100°C unless it is under pressure, 
foods cooked with moist heat (boiling, steaming, poach¬ 
ing, stewing) will not brown. Foods cooked using dry- 
heat methods (sauteing, grilling, or roasting) will brown. 
It is for this reason that many stewed and braised dishes 
begin with an initial browning of ingredients before liq¬ 
uid is added. 


Starch, a complex carbohydrate, has powerful thick¬ 
ening properties. When starch is combined with water 
or another liquid and heated, individual starch granules 
absorb the liquid and swell. This process, known as gela¬ 
tion, is what causes the liquid to thicken. Gelation occurs 
at different temperatures for different types of starch. 
As a general rule of thumb, root-based starches (potato 
and arrowroot, for instance) thicken at lower tempera¬ 
tures and break down more quickly, whereas cereal- 




based starches (corn and wheat, for example) thicken 
at higher temperatures and break down more slowly. 
High levels of sugar or acid can inhibit gelation, while the 
presence of salt can promote it. 


DENATURING PROTEINS 


At the molecular level, natural proteins are shaped like 
coils or springs. When natural proteins are exposed to 
heat, salt, or acid, they denature—that is, their coils 
unwind. When proteins denature, they tend to bond to¬ 
gether (coagulate) and form solid clumps. An example of 
this is a cooked egg white, which changes from a trans¬ 
parent fluid to an opaque solid. As proteins coagulate, 
they lose some of their capacity to hold water, which is 
why protein-rich foods give off moisture as they cook, 
even if they are steamed or poached. Fortunately, some 
heat-induced denaturation is reversible through cool¬ 
ing. This is why roasted foods should be allowed to rest 
before carving; as the temperature falls, some of the 
water (“juice") that was forced into spaces between the 
proteins is reabsorbed and the food becomes moister. 
Denatured proteins are easier to digest than natural 
proteins. 




EGG STRUCTURE AND USES 




The egg is composed of two main parts, the 
white and the yolk. Various membranes help 
keep the yolk suspended at the center of 
the white and help prevent contamination 
or weight loss through evaporation. Whole 
eggs, as well as whites and yolks separately, 
play a number of important culinary roles. 
Whole eggs are used as the main compo¬ 
nent of many breakfast dishes and can be 
prepared by scrambling, frying, poaching, 
or baking, or in custards. In baked goods, 
whole eggs are used as a glaze and to add 
nourishment, flavor, and color. 


The egg white consists almost exclu¬ 
sively of water and a protein called albu¬ 
men. Its ability to form a relatively stable 
foam is crucial to the development of 




proper structure in many items such as 
angel food cakes, souffles, and meringues. 
Egg whites are a key ingredient in clarify¬ 
ing stocks and broths to produce con¬ 
somme. They may also be used as a binder 
in some forcemeats, especially mousselines 
made from fish, poultry, or vegetables. 


The yolk contains protein, a significant 
amount of fat, and a natural emulsifier 
called lecithin. The yolk also has the ability 
to foam. This function, plus its ability to 
form emulsions, makes egg yolks crucial 
to the preparation of such items as may¬ 
onnaise, hollandaise sauce, and genoise 
(sponge cake). Yolks also provide addi¬ 
tional richness to food, as when they are 
included as a liaison in sauces or soups.