food and 
kitchen safety 




The importance of food and kitchen safety cannot be overemphasized. 
Few things are as detrimental to a foodservice establishment as an 
officially noted outbreak of a food-borne illness causejfby poor sanitary 
practices. In addition to providing a sanitary atmospjpre and adhering 
to procedures for safe food handling, it is also important to ensure 
a safe working environment. This chapter covers Me causes of food- 
borne illnesses and prevention procedures, ancMpudes checklists 
to help the staff achieve sanitary and safe kit^pn conditions 


CHAPTER 4 










food-borne illness 




Foods can serve as carriers for many different illnesses. 
The most common symptoms of food-borne illnesses 
include abdominal cramps, nausea, vomiting, and diar¬ 
rhea, possibly accompanied by fever. These symptoms 
may appear within a few hours after consumption of the 
affected food, although in some cases several days may 
elapse before onset. In order for a food-borne illness to 
be declared an official outbreak, it must involve two or 
more people who have eaten the same food, and health 
officials must confirm it. 


Food-borne illnesses are caused by adulterated 
foods (foods unfit for human consumption). The sever¬ 
ity of the illness depends on the amount of adulterated 
food ingested and, to a great extent, the individual's sus¬ 
ceptibility. Children, the elderly, and anyone whose im¬ 
mune system is already under siege generally will have 
much more difficulty than a healthy adult in combating a 
food-borne illness. 


The source of the contamination affecting the 
food supply can be chemical, physical, or biological. 
Insecticides and cleaning compounds are examples of 
chemical contaminants that may accidentally find their 
way into foods. Physical contaminants include bits of 
glass, rodent hairs, and paint chips. Careless food han¬ 
dling can mean that even an earring or a plastic bandage 
could fall into the food and result in illness or injury. 


Biological contaminants account for the majority 
of food-borne illnesses. These include naturally oc¬ 
curring poisons, known as toxins, found in certain wild 
mushrooms, rhubarb leaves, green potatoes, and other 
plants. The predominant biological agents, however, are 
disease-causing microorganisms known as pathogens, 
which are responsible for up to 95 percent of all food- 
borne illnesses. Microorganisms of many kinds are 
present virtually everywhere, and most are helpful or 
harmless, if not essential; only about 1 percent of micro¬ 
organisms are actually pathogenic. 


Food-borne illnesses caused by biological con¬ 
taminants fall into two subcategories: intoxication and 
infection. Intoxication occurs when a person consumes 
food containing toxins from bacteria, molds, or certain 
plants and animals. Once in the body, these toxins act as 
poison. Botulism is an example of an intoxication. 


In the case of an infection, the food eaten by an indi¬ 
vidual contains large numbers of living pathogens. These 
pathogens multiply in the body and generally attack the 
gastrointestinal lining. Salmonellosis is an example of 




an infection. Some food-borne illnesses have character¬ 
istics of both an intoxication and an infection. E. coli is 
an agent that causes such an illness. 


FOOD PATHOGENS 


The specific types of pathogens responsible for food- 
borne illnesses are fungi, viruses, parasites, and bac¬ 
teria. Fungi, which include molds and yeast, are more 
adaptable than other microorganisms and have a high 
tolerance for acidic conditions. They are more often re¬ 
sponsible for food spoilage than for food-borne illness. 
Beneficial fungi are important to the food industry in 
the production of cheese, bread, wine, and beer. 


Viruses do not actually multiply in food, but if 
through poor sanitation practice a virus contaminates 
food, consumption of that food may result in illness. 
Infectious hepatitis A, caused by eating shellfish har¬ 
vested from polluted waters (an illegal practice) or poor 
hand-washing practices after using the restroom, is an 
example. Once in the body, a virus invades a cell (called 
the host cell ) and essentially reprograms it to produce 
more copies of the virus. The copies leave the dead host 
cell behind and invade still more cells. The best defenses 
against food-borne viruses are good personal hygiene 
and obtaining shellfish from certified waters. 


Parasites are pathogens that feed on and take shel¬ 
ter in another organism, called a host. The host receives 
no benefit from the parasite and, in fact, suffers harm or 
even death as a result. Amebas and various worms such 
as Trichinella spiralis, which is associated with pork, are 
among the parasites that contaminate foods. Different 
parasites reproduce in different ways. One example is 
the parasitic worm that exists in larval stage in muscle 
meats. Once consumed, its life cycle and reproductive 
cycle continue. When the larvae reach adult stage, the 
fertilized females release more eggs, which hatch and 
travel to the muscle tissue of the host, and the cycle 
continues. 


Bacteria are responsible for a significant percent¬ 
age of biologically caused food-borne illnesses. In order 
to better protect food during storage, preparation, and 
service, it is important to understand the classifications 
and patterns of bacterial growth. Among the differ¬ 
ent conventions for the classification of bacteria, the 
most relevant to chefs are their requirement for oxygen 
(aerobic/anaerobic/facultative), their effects on people 




32 




THE CULINARY PROFESSIONAL 




(pathogenic/undesirable/beneficial/benign), and their 
spore-forming abilities. Aerobic bacteria require the 
presence of oxygen to grow. Anaerobic bacteria do not 
require oxygen and may even die when exposed to it. 
Facultative bacteria are able to function with or without 
oxygen. It is also important to know at which tempera¬ 
ture bacteria grow best. Certain bacteria are able to 
form endospores, which serve as a means of protection 
against adverse circumstances such as high tempera¬ 
ture or dehydration. Endospores allow an individual 
bacterium to resume its life cycle if favorable conditions 
should recur. 


Bacteria require three basic conditions for growth 
and reproduction: a protein source, readily available 
moisture, and time. The higher the amount of protein in 
a food, the greater its potential as a carrier of a food- 
borne illness. The amount of moisture available in a 
food is measured on the water activity (Aw) scale. This 
scale runs from 0 to 1, with 1 representing the Aw of 
water. Foods with a water activity above 0.85 support 
bacterial growth. A food's relative acidity or alkalinity 
is measured on a scale known as pH. A moderate pH—a 
value between 4.6 and 10 on a scale that ranges from 1 
to 14—is best for bacterial growth, and most foods fall 
within that range. Adding highly acidic ingredients, such 
as vinegar or citrus juice, to a food can lower its pH and 
extend its shelf life. 


Many foods provide the three conditions necessary 
for bacterial growth and are therefore considered to 
be potentially hazardous. Meats, poultry, seafood, tofu, 
and dairy products (with the exception of some hard 
cheeses) are all categorized as potentially hazardous 
foods. Foods do not necessarily have to be animal based 
to contain protein, however; vegetables and grains also 
contain protein. Cooked rice, beans, pasta, and potatoes 
are therefore also potentially hazardous foods. There 
are also other unlikely candidates that are ripe for bac¬ 
terial growth such as sliced melons, sprouts, and garlic- 
and-oil mixtures. 


Food that contains pathogens in great enough num¬ 
bers to cause illness may still look and smell normal. 
Disease-causing microorganisms are too small to be 
seen with the naked eye, so it is usually impossible to 
ascertain visually that food is adulterated. Because the 
microorganisms—particularly the bacteria—that cause 
food-borne illness are different from the ones that 
cause food to spoil, food may be adulterated and still 
have no “off'odor. 




Although cooking food will destroy many of the 
microorganisms present, careless food handling after 
cooking can reintroduce pathogens that will grow even 
more quickly without competition for food and space 
from the microorganisms that cause spoilage. Although 
shortcuts and carelessness do not always result in food- 
borne illness, inattention to detail increases the risk of 
creating an outbreak that may cause serious illness or 
even death. The various kinds of expenses related to an 
outbreak of food-borne illness, such as negative public¬ 
ity and loss of prestige, are blows from which many res¬ 
taurants can never recover. 


AVOIDING CROSS CONTAMINATION 


Many food-borne illnesses are a result of unsanitary 
handling procedures in the kitchen. Cross contamination 
occurs when disease-causing elements or harmful sub¬ 
stances are transferred from one contaminated surface 
to another. 


Excellent personal hygiene is one of the best de¬ 
fenses against cross contamination. An employee who 
reports for work with a contagious illness or an infected 
cut on the hand puts every customer at risk. Any time 
the hands come in contact with a possible source of con¬ 
tamination (the face, hair, eyes, and mouth) they must be 
thoroughly washed before continuing any work. 


Food is at greatest risk of cross contamination dur¬ 
ing the preparation stage. Ideally, separate work areas 
and cutting boards should be used for raw and cooked 
foods. Equipment and cutting boards should always be 
cleaned and thoroughly sanitized between uses. 


All food must be stored carefully to prevent contact 
between raw and cooked items. Place drip pans beneath 
raw foods. Do not handle ready-to-eat foods with bare 
hands. Instead, use suitable utensils or single-use food- 
handling gloves. 






chapter 4 » FOOD AND KITCHEN SAFETY 




33 




PROPER HAND WASHING 




To reduce the chances of cross contamina¬ 
tion, wash your hands often and correctly. 
Hands and forearms should be washed us¬ 
ing soap and no°F/43°C water for no less 
than twenty seconds. Be sure to wash your 




hands at the beginning of each shift and 
each new task, after handling raw foods, 
after going to the bathroom, sneezing, 
coughing, and so forth, and after handling 
any nonfood item. 




KEEPING FOODS OUTOFTHE 
DANGER ZONE 


An important weapon against pathogens is the ob¬ 
servance of strict time and temperature controls. 
Generally, the disease-causing microorganisms found in 
foods, with the exception of E. coli 0157:H7, need to be 
present in significant quantities in order to make some¬ 
one ill. Once pathogens have established themselves in 
a food source, they will either thrive or be destroyed, 
depending upon how long foods are in the danger zone. 


There are pathogens that can live at all temperature 
ranges. For most of those capable of causingfood-borne 
illness, the friendliest environment provides tempera¬ 
tures within a range of 41° to 135°F/5° to 57°C—the 
danger zone. Most pathogens are either destroyed or 
will not reproduce at temperatures above 135°F/57°C. 
Storing food at temperatures below 41°F/5°C will slow 
or interrupt the cycle of reproduction. (It should also be 
noted that intoxicating pathogens may be destroyed 
during cooking, but any toxins they have produced are 
still there.) 


When conditions are favorable, bacteria can repro¬ 
duce at an astonishing rate. Therefore, controlling the 
time during which foods remain in the danger zone is 
critical to the prevention of food-borne illness. Foods 
left in the danger zone for a period longer than four 
hours are considered adulterated. Additionally, the 
four-hour period is cumulative, meaning that the meter 
continues running every time the food enters the danger 
zone. Once the four-hour period has been exceeded, 
heating or cooling cannot recover foods. 


receive and store foods safely 


It is not unheard of for foods to be delivered to a food- 
service operation already contaminated. To prevent 
this from happening to you, inspect all goods to be sure 




they arrive in sanitary conditions. Check the ambient 
temperature inside the delivery truck to see that it is 
correct. Check the temperature of the product as well as 
the expiration dates. Verify that foods have the required 
government inspection and certification stamps or tags. 
Randomly sample items and reject any goods that do 
not meet your standards. Move the items immediately 
into proper storage conditions. 


Refrigeration and freezer units should be main¬ 
tained on a regular schedule and equipped with ther¬ 
mometers to ascertain that the temperature remains 
within a safe range. Although in most cases chilling will 
not actually kill pathogens, it does drastically slow down 
reproduction. In general, refrigerators should be kept 
between 36° and 40°F/2° and 4°C, but quality is better 
maintained if certain foods can be stored at these spe¬ 
cific temperatures: 


Meat and poultry: 32° to 36°F/0° to 2°C 


Fish and shellfish: 30° to 34°F/-1° to 1°C 


Eggs: 38° to 40°F/3° to 4°C 


Dairy products: 36° to 40°F/2° to 4°C 


Produce: 40° to 45°F/4°to 7°C 


Separate refrigerators for each of the above cat¬ 
egories are ideal, but if necessary, a single unit can be 






Danger zone icon Time and temperature icon 




34 




THE CULINARY PROFESSIONAL 


























divided into sections. The front of the unit will be the 
warmest area, the back the coldest. Before storing food 
in the refrigerator, it should be properly cooled, stored 
in clean containers, wrapped, and labeled clearly with 
the contents and date. Store raw products below and 
away from cooked foods to prevent cross contamination 
by dripping. Use the principle of "first in, first out" (FIFO) 
when arranging food, so that older items are in the front. 


Dry storage is used for foods such as canned goods, 
spices, condiments, cereals, and staples such as flour 
and sugar, as well as for some fruits and vegetables that 
do not require refrigeration and have low perishability. 
As with all storage, the area must be clean, with proper 
ventilation and air circulation. Cleaning supplies should 
be stored in a separate place. 


hold cooked or ready-to-serve 
foods safely 


Keep hot foods hot and cold foods cold. Use hot-holding 
equipment (steam tables, double boilers, bain-maries, 
heated cabinets or drawers, chafing dishes, etc.) to keep 
foods at or above 135°F/57°C. Do not use hot-holding 
equipment for cooking or reheating. Use cold-holding 
equipment (ice or refrigeration) to keep cold foods at or 
below a temperature of 41°F/5°C. 


cool foods safely 


One of the leading causes of food-borne illness is 
improperly cooled food. Cooked foods that are to be 
stored need to be cooled to below 41°F/5°C as quickly 
as possible. This should be completed within four hours, 




unless you use the two-stage cooling method. In the 
first stage of this method, foods must be cooled to 
70°F/21°C within two hours. In the second stage, foods 
must reach 41°F/5°C or below within an additional four 
hours, for a total cooling time of six hours. According 
to FDA guidelines, using the two-stage method quickly 
moves the food through the part of the danger zone 
where bacteria grow most rapidly. 


The proper way to cool hot liquids is to place them 
in a metal container in an ice water bath that reaches 
the same level as the liquid inside the container. Stir the 
liquid in the container frequently so that the warmer 
liquid at the center mixes with the cooler liquid at the 
outer edges of the container, bringing down the overall 
temperature more rapidly. 


Semisolid and solid foods should be refrigerated in 
a single layer in shallow containers to allow greater sur¬ 
face exposure to the cold air. For the same reason, large 
cuts of meat or other foods should be cut into smaller 
portions, cooled to room temperature, and wrapped be¬ 
fore refrigerating. 


reheat foods safely 


When foods are prepared ahead and then reheated, they 
should move through the danger zone as rapidly as pos¬ 
sible and be reheated to at least 165°F/74°C for a mini¬ 
mum of fifteen seconds. As long as all proper cooling 
and reheating procedures are followed each time, foods 
may be cooled and reheated more than once. 


Food should be brought to the proper temperature 
over direct heat (burner, flattop, grill, or conventional 




SAFE HANDLING OF EGGS 




Today’s consumer is well aware of the po¬ 
tential for food-borne illness through eggs. 
Therefore, we will look at basic rules for safe 
handling of eggs and foods containing eggs. 


» All eggs in the shell should be free from 
cracks, leaks, and obvious holes. 


» Raw egg yolks are a potentially hazardous 
food, due to the possible presence of Sal¬ 
monella enteritidis bacteria. Salmonella 
bacteria are killed when the eggs are held 




at a temperature of at least 140°F/6 o°C for 
a minimum of^Vi minutes. The bacteria 
are also killed instantly at i6o°F/yi°C. 
Fried eggs or poached eggs with runny 
yolks should be prepared only at customer 
request. 


» Any food containing eggs must be kept at 
safe temperatures throughout handling, 
cooking, and storage. Cooling and reheat - 
ing must be done quickly. 




chapter 4 » FOOD AND KITCHEN SAFETY 




35 








oven) or in a microwave oven. Do not use hot-holding 
equipment for cooking or reheating. A steam table will 
adequately hold reheated foods above 135°F/57°C, but 
it will not bring foods out of the danger zone quickly 
enough. Instant-read thermometers should always be 
used to check temperatures. 


thaw frozen foods safely 


Frozen foods may be thawed safely in several ways. 
Never thaw food at room temperature. The best (though 
slowest) method is to allow the food to thaw under re¬ 
frigeration. The food should still be wrapped and should 
be placed in a shallow container on a bottom shelf to 
prevent possible cross contamination. 


If there is not time to thaw foods in the refrigerator, 
covered or wrapped food may be placed in a container 
under running water of approximately 70°F/21°C or 
below. Use a stream of water strong enough to circulate 
the water around the food. 


Individual portions that are to be cooked immedi¬ 
ately may be thawed in a microwave oven. Liquids, small 
items, and individual portions may even be cooked with¬ 
out thawing, but larger pieces that are cooked while still 
frozen become overcooked on the outside before they 
are thoroughly done throughout. 


HAZARD ANALYSIS CRITICAL CONTROL 
POINTS (HACCP) 


HACCP stands for Hazard Analysis Critical Control 
Points, which is a scientific state-of-the-art food safety 
program originally developed for astronauts. HACCP 
takes a systematic approach to the conditions that are 
responsible for most food-borne illnesses. It is preven¬ 
tive in nature, anticipating how food safety problems 
are most likely to occur and taking steps to prevent 
them from occurring. The types of hazards of concern 
are biological, chemical, and physical. Biological hazards 
are typically microbiological, which include bacteria, 
viruses, and parasites. Chemical hazards can be found in 
the sanitation products used in the kitchen and physical 
hazards include glass, wood, stones, or other foreign 
objects. 


The HACCP system has been adopted by both food 
processors and restaurants, as well as by the FDA and 
U5DA. At this time, there are no particular mandates 
that all foodservice establishments must use HACCP. 
However, instituting such a plan may prove advanta¬ 
geous on many levels. The heart of HACCP is contained 
in the following seven principles: 




1. ASSESS THE HAZARDS. The first step in a HACCP 
program begins with a hazard analysis of the menu 
item or recipe. The process must be looked at by 
designing a flowchart that covers every step in the 
period from “dock to dish." 


2. IDENTIFYTHE CRITICAL CONTROL POINTS.The 
next decision to make, after you have established 
a flow diagram and identified potential hazards, 
is to identify the critical control points (CCPs). A 
critical control point is the place in the utilization 
of the food at which you have the ability to prevent, 
eliminate, or reduce an existing hazard or to pre¬ 
vent or minimize the likelihood that a hazard will 
occur. To quote the 1999 FDA Food Code, a critical 
control point is “a point or procedure in a specific 
food system where loss of control may result in an 
unacceptable health risk." One of the most difficult 
aspects of putting together a HACCP program is not 
to overidentify these critical control points. 


3. ESTABLISH CRITICAL LIMITS AND CONTROL 
MEASURES. Critical limits are generally standards 
for each critical control point; control measures 
are what you can do ahead of time to facilitate the 
achievement of your critical limit. Many limits have 
already been established by local health depart¬ 
ments. For example, an established critical limit 
for the cooking step in preparing chicken is a final 
internal temperature of 165°F/74°C. If you were to 
hold this chicken on the line before actual service, it 
would have to be kept at 140°F/60°C to prevent the 
growth of pathogenic organisms. Holding would be 
another critical step in this process. 


4. ESTABLISH PROCEDURES FOR MONITORING 
CCPs. Critical limits for each CCP have to be estab¬ 
lished to identify what is to be monitored. You must 
also establish how the CCP will be monitored and 
who will do it. Monitoring helps improve the system 
by forcing identification of problems or faults at 
particular points in the process. This allows for more 
control or improvement in the system. 


5. ESTABLISH CORRECTIVE ACTION PLANS. A plan of 
action must be identified to deal with a deviation or 
substandard level that occurs for a step in the pro¬ 
cess. Specific corrective actions must be developed 
for each CCP, because each food item and its prepa¬ 
ration can vary greatly from one kitchen to the next. 




36 




THE CULINARY PROFESSIONAL 




6. SET UP A RECORD-KEEPING SYSTEM. Keep docu¬ 
mentation on hand to demonstrate whether the sys¬ 
tem is working. Recording events at CCPs ensures that 
critical limits are met and preventive monitoring is 
occurring. Documentation typically consists of time/ 
temperature logs, checklists, and sanitation forms. 


7. DEVELOP A VERIFICATION SYSTEM. This step es¬ 
tablishes procedures to ensure that the HACCP plan 
is working correctly. If procedures are not being 
followed, make the necessary modifications to the 
system so that they are. 


SERVING FOODS SAFELY 


The potential to transmit food-borne illness does not 
end when the food leaves the kitchen. Restaurant serv¬ 
ers should also be instructed in good hygiene and safe 
food-handling practices. Hands should be properly 
washed after using the restroom, eating, smoking, 
touching one's face or hair, and handling money, dirty 
dishes, or soiled table linens. When setting tables, never 




touch the parts of flatware that come in contact with 
food, and handle glassware by the stems or bases only. 
Carry plates, glasses, and flatware in such a way that 
food contact surfaces are not touched. Serve all foods 
using the proper utensils. 


CLEANING AND SANITIZING 


Cleaning refers to the removal of soil or food par¬ 
ticles, whereas sanitizing involves using moist heat or 
chemical agents to kill pathogenic microorganisms. For 
equipment that cannot be immersed in a sink, or for 
equipment such as knives and cutting boards employed 
during food preparation, use a wiping cloth soaked in a 
double-strength sanitizing solution to clean and sanitize 
between uses. Iodine, chlorine, or quaternary ammonium 
compounds are all common sanitizing agents. 


Small equipment, tools, pots, and tableware should 
be run through a ware-washing machine or washed 
manually in a three-compartment sink. After sanitizing, 
equipment and tableware should be allowed to air-dry 




FOOD ALLERGIES 




The way your body reacts when you eat a 
food to which you are truly allergic can be 
dramatic or even dangerous. An allergic 
reaction to a food may also occur rapidly. 
The skin may become itchy and develop 
hives or welts. Some people experience 
swelling of their throats or tongues. Severe 
reactions require immediate medical 
attention. 


A true food allergy is nothing to fool 
around with. As a chef, you can’t assume 
that a request for “no garlic” indicates an 
unevolved pedate or an unreasonable food 
dislike. For the individual suffering from a 
food allergy, even the merest hint of garlic 
in his or her soup can set off a reaction. 


People who suffer from an allergy 
will ask about the menu in regard to the 
food(s) that they cannot eat. It is impor¬ 
tant that you and your staff know the 
ingredients used in a dish. As of January 
2006 all packaged foods that contain 




major food allergens must identify them 
on the label, so you must be certain that 
you have read the label on prepared foods 
thoroughly. 


It is also important to realize that de¬ 
pending on an individual’s sensitivity, even 
the very small amount of allergen left on 
a piece of equipment and transferred to a 
food could be enough to set off a reaction. 


Some of the most common food aller¬ 
gies are to the following: 


» Peanuts 
» Tree nuts 
» Milk 
» Eggs 
» Wheat 
» Soy 
» Fish 
» Shellfish 




chapter 4 » FOOD AND KITCHEN SAFETY 




37 








completely, because using paper or cloth toweling could 
result in cross contamination. 


Careful sanitation procedures, proper handling of 
foods, and a well-maintained facility all work together 


kitchen safety 


In addition to the precautions necessary to guard 
against food-borne illness, care must also be taken to 
avoid accidents to staff and guests. The following 
safety measures should be practiced. 


HEALTH AND HYGIENE 


Maintain good general health with regular checkups. Do 
not handle food when ill. Keep any burn or break in the 
skin covered with a clean, waterproof bandage. Cover 
your face with a tissue when coughing or sneezing and 
wash hands afterward. 


Keep hair clean and neat, and contain it if necessary. 
Keep fingernails short and well maintained, with no pol¬ 
ish. Keep hands away from hair and face when working 
with food. 


FIRE SAFETY 


It takes only a few seconds for a simple flare-up to turn 
into a full-scale fire. Grease fires, electrical fires, or even 
a waste container full of paper catching fire when a match 
is carelessly tossed into it are easy to imagine in any busy 
kitchen. A comprehensive fire safety plan should be in 
place and a standard part of all employee training. 


The first step to take to avoid fires is to make sure 
that the entire staff is fully aware of potential fire dan¬ 
gers. Be sure that all equipment is up to code. Frayed or 
exposed wires and faulty plugs can all too easily be the 
cause of a fire. Overburdened outlets are another com¬ 
mon culprit. 


Have fire extinguishers in easily accessible areas. 
Proper maintenance of extinguishers and timely inspec¬ 
tions by your local fire department are vital. The exits 
from all areas of the building should be easy to find, 
clear of any obstructions, and fully operational. 


Thorough training is essential. Everyone should 
know what to do in case of a fire. Your guests rely on you 




to prevent a pest infestation. Take the necessary steps 
to prohibit the potential harboring of various pathogens 
caused by pests. 




and your staff for guidance. Instruct your kitchen staff 
in the correct way to handle a grill fire and grease fire. 
(Above all, make sure everyone knows never to try to put 
out a grease, chemical, or electrical fire by throwing wa¬ 
ter on the flames.) Everyone should know where the fire 
department number is posted. 


DRESSING FOR SAFETY 


The various parts of the typical chefs uniform play im¬ 
portant roles in keeping workers safe as they operate in 
a potentially dangerous environment. The chefs jacket, 
for instance, is double-breasted to create a two-layer 
cloth barrier over the chest to protect against steam 
burns, splashes, and spills. (The design also allows the 
jacket to be rebuttoned on the opposite side to cover 
any spills.) The sleeves of the jacket are long to cover as 
much of the arm as possible. Pants should be worn with¬ 
out cuffs, which can trap hot liquids and debris. 


Be it a tall white toque or a favorite baseball cap, 
chefs wear hats to contain their hair and prevent it from 
falling into the food. Hats also help absorb sweat from 
overheated brows. Neckerchiefs serve a similar sweat- 
absorbing role. 


The apron is worn only to protect the jacket and 
pants from excessive staining. Side towels are used to 
protect their hands when working with hot pans, dishes, 
or other equipment. Side towels used to lift hot items 
must be dry in order to provide protection. 


Hard leather shoes with slip-resistant soles are rec¬ 
ommended because of the protection they offer and the 
support they give feet. 


Jackets, pants, aprons, side towels, and shoes can 
harbor bacteria, molds, and parasites. Use hot water, a 
good detergent, and a sanitizer, such as borax or chlo¬ 
rine bleach, to remove grime.