equipment 


identification 






Tools, targe and small, make it possible for chefs to do their jobs well 
in fact, using the right tool for the job is one of the hallmarks of a 
professional. Equally important is the ability to handle and care for e 
tool, whether it is a cutting board, a knife, a mandoline, or a stockpot. 


























knives 




Assembling a personal collection of knives is one of 
the first steps in becoming a professional. Just as an 
artist or craftsperson gathers together the tools neces¬ 
sary for painting, sculpting, or drawing, you will need to 
select knives that allow you to do your work in the saf¬ 
est and most efficient way. The knives you choose will 
become as important to you as your own fingers—quite 
literally an extension of your own hands. 


1. Handle knives with respect Knives can be damaged if 
they are handled carelessly. Even though good-quality 
knives are manufactured to last a lifetime, they are 
still prone to damage if not properly taken care of. 


2. Keep knives sharp. Learn the proper techniques for 
both sharpening and honing knives. A sharp knife not 
only performs better, but is safer to use because less 
effort is required to cut through the food. There are 
many ways to sharpen knives. Use a stone periodi¬ 
cally, a sharpening machine, or send them to a profes¬ 
sional cutlery sharpener. 


3. Keep knives clean. Clean knives thoroughly immedi¬ 
ately after using them. Sanitize the entire knife, in¬ 
cluding the handle, bolster, and blade, as necessary, so 
that the tool will not cross contaminate food. Do not 
clean knives in a dishwasher. 


4. Use safe handling procedures for knives. There are 
standards of behavior that should be remembered 
when using knives. When you are passing a knife, lay it 
down on a work surface so that the handle is extended 
toward the person who will pick it up. Whenever you 
must carry a knife from one area of the kitchen to 
another, hold the knife straight down at your side with 
the sharp edge facing behind you, and let people know 
you are passing by with something sharp. When you 
lay a knife down on a work surface, be sure that no 
part of it extends over the edge of the cutting board 
or worktable. Also, do not cover the knife with food, 
towels, equipment, and the like. Be sure the blade is 
facing away from the edge of the work surface. Do not 
attempt to catch a falling knife. 




5. Use an appropriate cutting surface. Cutting directly 
on metal, glass, or marble surfaces will dull and even¬ 
tually damage the blade of a knife. To prevent dulling, 
always use wooden or composition cutting boards. 


6. Keep knives properly stored. There are a number of 
safe, practical ways to store knives, including in knife 
kits or rolls, slots, or racks, and on magnetized hold¬ 
ers. Storage systems should be kept just as clean as 
knives. 


THE PARTS OF A KNIFE 


To select a knife of good quality that fits your hand well 
and is suitable for the intended task, you need a basic 
knowledge of the various parts of a knife. 


blades 


Currently, the most frequently used material for blades 
is high-carbon stainless steel. Other materials, such as 
stainless steel and carbon steel, are also available. 


Although carbon-steel blades take a better edge 
than either regular or high-carbon stainless steel, they 
tend to lose their sharpness quickly. Also, carbon-steel 
blades will discolor when they come into contact with 
acidic foods. The metal is brittle and can break easily 
under stress. 


Stainless steel is much stronger than carbon steel 
and will not discolor or rust. It is difficult to get a good 
edge on a stainless-steel blade, although once an edge 
is established, it tends to last longer than the edge on a 
carbon-steel blade. 


High-carbon stainless steel is a relatively recent 
development that combines the advantages of carbon 
steel and stainless steel. The higher percentage of car¬ 
bon allows the blade to take and keep a keener edge. 


The most desirable type of blade for general use is 
taper-ground, meaning that the blade has been forged 
out of a single sheet of metal and has been ground so 
that it tapers smoothly from the spine to the cutting 
edge, with no apparent beveling. 


Hollow-ground blades are made by combining two 
sheets of metal. The edges are then beveled or fluted. 




44 




TOOLS AND INGREDIENTS IN THE PROFESSIONAL KITCHEN 




TIP 




tangs 


The tang is a continuation of the blade that extends into 
the knife's handle. Knives used for heavy work, such as 
chefs knives or cleavers, should have a full tang; that is, 
the tang is almost as long as the entire handle. Although 
blades with partial tangs are not as durable, they are 
acceptable on knives that will be used less frequently. 
Rat-tail tangs are much narrower than the spine of the 
blade and are encased in the handle. 


handles 


A preferred material for knife handles is rosewood, 
because it is extremely hard and has a very tight or 
fine grain, which helps prevent splitting and cracking. 
Impregnating wood with plastic protects the handle 
from damage caused by continued exposure to water 
and detergents. The handle should fit your hand com¬ 
fortably. A comfortable fit will reduce fatigue. 


rivets 


Metal rivets are usually used to secure the tang to the 
handle. The rivets should be completely smooth and lie 
flush with the surface of the handle. 


bolsters 


In some knives, there is a collar or shank, known as a 
bolster, at the point where the blade meets the handle. 
This is a sign of a well-made knife. The bolster helps to 
balance the knife and protect the hand from accidental 
slips. Some knives may have a collar that looks like a 
bolster but is actually a separate piece attached to 
the handle. These knives tend to come apart easily and 
should be avoided. 




CUTTING 


EDGE 






HANDLE 






SPINE 




HEEL 


BOLSTER 


RIVETS 




PARTS OF A KNIFE 




chapters » EQUIPMENT IDENTIFICATION 




45 




knives 












types of knives A wide array of knives is 


available to suit specific functions. As you continue to 
work in professional kitchens, your knife kit will grow 




knife, boning knife, paring knife, and sheer—but also a 
number of special knives. This list is intended as a guide 
to the knives that may be found in nearly any well- 




to encompass not only the basics—chef’s or French 






FRENCH KNIVES 






J 




BONING KNIFE FLUTED-EDGE 
SANTOKU 




PARING TOURNE 
KNIFE KNIFE 




46 




TOOLS AND INGREDIENTS IN THE PROFESSIONAL KITCHEN 


























































Common Kitchen Knives 




NAME(S) 


CHARACTERISTICS 


COMMON USES 


chef’s knife/ 


French knife 


Blade 8-12 inches long 


All-purpose knife: a variety of chop¬ 
ping, slicing, and mincing chores 


utility knife 


Smaller, lighter chefs knife with a blade 
5-8 inches long 


Various cutting chores 


paring knife 


Blade 2-4 inches long 


Paring and trimming vegetables and 
fruits 


boning knife 


Blade is thinner than that of chefs knife, 
about 6 inches long, and rigid 


Separating raw meat from bone 


filleting knife 


Similar in shape and size to a boning 
knife, but thinner and with a more flex¬ 
ible blade 


Filleting fish 


sheer 


Long blade with a round or pointed tip; 
blade may be flexible or rigid, tapered or 
round, or have a fluted edge 


Slicing cooked meat; also suitable for 
slicing food such as smoked salmon 


cleaver 


Heavy enough to cut through bones; 
rectangular blade; varies in size accord¬ 
ing to its intended use 


Chopping 


tourne knife 


Similar to a paring knife; has curved 
blade to facilitate cutting curved sur¬ 
faces of tourneed vegetables 


Tourneeing vegetables 




chapter 5 » 




EQUIPMENT IDENTIFICATION 




47 




knives 




























SHARPENING AND HONING 


The key to the proper and efficient use of any knife is 
making sure that it is sharp. A knife with a sharp blade 
always works better and more safely because it cuts 
easily. Knife blades are given an edge on a sharpening 
stone and maintained between sharpenings by honing 
them with a steel. 


Sharpening stones are essential to the proper main¬ 
tenance of knives. Sharpen the blade by passing its edge 
over the stone at a 20-degree angle. The grit—the de¬ 
gree of coarseness or fineness of the stone's surface— 
abrades the blade's edge, creating a sharp cutting edge. 
When sharpening a knife, always begin by using the 
coarsest surface of the stone, and then move on to the 
finer surfaces. 


A stone with a fine grit should be used for boning 
knives and other tools on which an especially sharp 
edge is required. Most stones may be used either dry or 
moistened with water or mineral oil. 


Carborundum stones have a fine side and a medium 
side. Arkansas stones are available in several grades 
of fineness. Some consist of three stones of varying 
degrees of fineness mounted on a wheel. Diamond- 
impregnated stones are also available. Although they 
are expensive, some chefs prefer them because they 
feel these stones give a sharper edge. 


Opinion is split about whether a knife blade should 
be run over a stone from heel to tip or tip to heel. Most 
chefs do agree that consistency in the direction of 
the stroke used to pass the blade over the stone is 
important. 


Before using a stone, be sure that it is properly sta¬ 
bilized. No matter which method you use, keep the fol¬ 
lowing guidelines in mind: 




1. Assemble your mise en place. 


2. Anchor the stone to keep it from slipping as you work. 
Place carborundum or diamond stones on a damp 
cloth or rubber mat. A triple-faced stone is mounted 
on a rotating framework that can be locked into posi¬ 
tion so that it cannot move. 


3. Lubricate the stone with mineral oil or water. Be con¬ 
sistent about the type of lubricant you use on your 
stone. Water or mineral oil helps reduce friction as 
you sharpen your knife. The heat caused by friction 
may not seem significant, but it can eventually harm 
the blade. 


4. Begin sharpening the edge on the coarsest grit you 
require. The duller the blade, the coarser the grit 
should be. 


5. Run the entire edge over the surface of the stone, 
keeping the pressure even on the knife. Hold the knife 
at the correct angle as you work. A 20-degree angle 


is suitable for chef's knives and knives with similar 
blades. You may need to adjust the angle by a few 
degrees to properly sharpen thinner blades such as 
slicers, or thicker blades such as cleavers. 


6. Always sharpen the blade in the same direction. This 
ensures that the edge remains even and in proper 
alignment. 


7. Make strokes of equal number and equal pressure on 
each side of the blade. Do not oversharpen the edge 
on coarse stones. After about ten strokes on each 
side of the blade, move on to the next finer grit. 


8. Finish sharpening on the finest stone then wash and 
dry the knife thoroughly before using or storing it. 




4 s 




TOOLS AND INGREDIENTS IN THE PROFESSIONAL KITCHEN 




Sharpening method one 










1. Use four fingers of the guiding hand to maintain 
constant pressure on the knife. 


2. Draw the knife across the stone gently. 




3. Draw the knife off the stone smoothly. Turn the knife 
over and repeat the entire process on the other side. 






1 . Push the blade over the stone's surface, using the 3. Push the knife off the stone smoothly. Turn the knife 


guiding hand to keep pressure even. over and repeat the entire process on the other side. 


2. Continue to push the entire length of the blade over 
the stone. 




chapters » EQUIPMENT IDENTIFICATION 




49 




knives 
































CERAMIC STONE 




FLAT STEEL 




HARD STEEL 




mu 




DIAMOND-IMPREGNATED STONE 




DIAMOND- 


IMPREGNATED CERAMIC STEELS 


STEEL (BLUE AND WHITE) 




steels a steel should be used both immediately after 
sharpening the blade with a stone and also between 
sharpenings to keep the edge in alignment. The length 
of the steel’s working surface can range from three inches 
for a pocket version to over fourteen inches. Hard steel 
is the traditional material for steels. Other materials, 
such as glass, ceramic, and diamond impregnated sur¬ 
faces, are also available. 




Steels come with coarse, medium, and fine grains, 
and some are magnetic, which helps the blade maintain 
proper alignment and also collects metal shavings. A 
guard or hilt between the steel and the handle protects 
the user, and a ring on the bottom of the handle can be 
used to hang the steel. 


When using a steel, hold the knife almost vertically, 
with the blade at a 20-degree angle, resting on the inner 
side of the steel. Draw the blade along the entire length 
of the steel. 




MULTISIDED OIL STONE (TRI-STONE) 




TOOLS AND INGREDIENTS IN THE PROFESSIONAL KITCHEN 




































Keep the following guidelines in mind: 


» Allow yourself plenty of room as you work, and stand 
with your weight evenly distributed. Hold the steel with 
your thumb and fingers safely behind the guard. 


» Draw the blade along the steel so that the entire edge 
touches the steel. Work in the same direction on each 
side of the blade to keep the edge straight. 


» Be sure to keep the pressure even to avoid wearing 
away the metal in the center of the edge. Over time, 




this could produce a curve in the edge. Keep the knife 
blade at a 20-degree angle to the steel. 


» Use a light touch, stroking evenly and consistently. 


Lay the blade against the steel; don't slap it. Listen for 
a light ringing sound; a heavy grinding sound indicates 
that too much pressure is being applied. 


» Repeat the stroke on the opposite side of the edge 
to properly straighten the edge. If a blade requires 
more than five strokes per side on a steel, it probably 
should be sharpened on a stone. 




Steeling method one 






1. Start with the knife nearly vertical, with the blade 
resting on the steel's inner side. 


2. Rotate the wrist holding the knife as the blade 
moves along the steel in a downward motion. 




D. Keep the blade in contact with the steel until the tip 
is drawn off the steel. Repeat the process with the blade 
resting on the steel's outer side. 




Steeling method two 










1. Hold the steel in a near-vertical position with the 
tip resting on a nonslippery surface. Start with the heel 
of the knife against one side of the steel. 


2. Maintain light pressure and use an arm action, not a 
wrist action, to draw the knife down the shaft of the steel 
in a smooth continuous motion. 




3. Finish the first pass by drawing the blade all the way 
along the shaft up to and including the tip. Repeat the 
entire action, this time with the blade against the steel's 
other side. 




chapters » EQUIPMENT IDENTIFICATION 




51 




steels 








































hand tools The object of using a specialized tool 
is to make the task at hand easier and more efficient. A 
number of small hand tools other than knives belong 
in a knife kit. The potential number and kind are too 




numerous to mention here. Particular preparations will 
dictate to the chef what hand tools are necessary and 
individual chefs will have their own particular likes and 
dislikes. 






BALL-BEARING 
ROLLING PIN 




KITCHEN FORK 




WIDE PERFORATED 
OFFSET SPATULA 




FRENCH ROLLING PINS 




BALLOON WHISKS 




SAUCE WHISK 




OFFSET PALETTE KNIVES 




SWIVEL-BLADED 


PEELERS 




52 




TOOLS AND INGREDIENTS IN THE PROFESSIONAL KITCHEN 










































































Common HandTools 




NAME(S) 


CHARACTERISTICS 


COMMON USES 


rotary peeler/ 
swivel-bladed peeler 


Blade may be mounted horizontally or 
vertically on the handle. Blade is typi¬ 
cally 2-3 inches long 


Peeling skin from vegetables and 
fruits. Swivel action accommodates 
contours of ingredients 


parisienne scoop/ 
melon bailer 


May have one scoop or two of different 
sizes, between Va and 3 A inch in diameter 


Scooping out balls or ovals from veg¬ 
etables and fruits 


kitchen fork 


A fork with two long tines approximately 
4-6 inches long 


Testing doneness of braised meats 
and vegetables; lifting finished items 
to the carving board or plate; holding 
an item being carved in place 


palette knife/ 
metal spatula 


Flexible round-tipped tool; may be flat 
or offset. Blade is between 4 and 5 
inches long and Vi-Va inch wide 


In the kitchen and bakeshop, 
spreading fillings and glazes; placing 
garnishes; portioning; and a variety of 
other functions 


whisks 


Balloon whisks are sphere shaped and 
have thin wires to incorporate air when 
making foams. Sauce whisks are nar¬ 
rower and frequently have thicker wires 


Beating, blending, and whipping 


offset spatula 


Blade is chisel edged, between 9 and 10 
inches long and 3-4 inches wide, set in a 
short handle 


Turning or lifting foods on grills, 
broilers, and griddles 




ET* 


P 


2 


P- 




O 


O 




C/3 




PROPER CARE AND CLEANING OF ROLLING PINS 




Rolling pins are made from hard, tight¬ 
grained woods, which prevent fats and 
flavorings used in rolled doughs from pen¬ 
etrating the pin. Rolling pins should never be 
washed with water. Doing this could ruin the 
integrity of the pin by warping or distorting 
the grain of the wood. Always use a dry cloth 
to wipe the pin clean immediately after use. 
Damage to the surface of the pin will relay 
imperfections to the dough being rolled. 




The two basic types of rolling pins are 
the French-style pin and the rod-and-bear- 
ing (ball-bearing) pin. The French pin is a 
long cylinder of wood rolled over the dough 
with the palms of the hands. The second 
type is heavier and wider. It has a length¬ 
wise shaft at the center of the wooden cyl¬ 
inder through which runs a metal rod with 
two wooden handles at either end. 




chapters » EQUIPMENT IDENTIFICATION 




53 


























measuring equipment Measurements 


are determined in many different ways in a professional 
kitchen. This makes it important to have equipment for 
liquid and dry volume measures calibrated for both the 
U.S. and metric systems, as well as a variety of scales for 
accurate measurement by weight. 




Among the most common and useful measuring 
equipment are the following: measuring pitchers (to 
measure liquid volumes); spring, balance beam, and 
electronic scales (to weigh ingredients for preparation 
and finished items for portion control); instant-read, 
candy, and deep-fat thermometers (to measure internal 
temperatures); and measuring spoons. 






SPRING SCALE 




INSTANT-READ THERMOMETERS 




MEASURING PITCHERS 




ELECTRONIC 


SCALE 




CANDY/DEEP-FAT 


THERMOMETER 




PROBE 


THERMOMETER 




54 




TOOLS AND INGREDIENTS IN THE PROFESSIONAL KITCHEN 


























sieves and strainers Sieves and strainers 


are used to sift, aerate, and help remove any large impuri¬ 
ties from dry ingredients. They are also used to drain or 
puree cooked or raw foods. The delicate mesh of some 
strainers is highly vulnerable to damage; never drop these 
into a pot sink, where they could be crushed or torn. 


The food mill is a type of strainer used to puree soft 
foods. A flat, curving blade is rotated over a disk by a 
hand-operated crank. Most professional models have 
interchangeable disks with holes of varying fineness. The 
drum sieve ( tamis ) consists of a tinned-steel, nylon, or 
stainless-steel screen stretched in an aluminum or wood 
frame. A drum sieve is used for sifting or pureeing. The 
conical sieve ( chinois ) is used for straining and/or 




pureeing food. The openings in the cone can vary in size 
from very large to very small. The colander, available in 
a variety of sizes, is a stainless-steel or aluminum sieve, 
with or without a base, used to strain or drain foods. The 
ricer is a device with a pierced hopper in which cooked 
food, often potatoes, is placed. A plate on the end of a 
lever pushes the food through the holes in the hopper. 
Cheesecloth is light, fine-mesh cotton gauze, frequently 
used with or in place of a fine conical sieve. It is essen¬ 
tial for straining some sauces. It is also used for making 
sachets. Before use, cheesecloth should be rinsed thor¬ 
oughly in hot water and then cold water to remove any 
loose fibers. Cheesecloth also clings better to the sides of 
bowls, sieves, and so forth when it is wet. 




FOOD MILL 






CHEESECLOTH 




chapters » EQUIPMENT IDENTIFICATION 




55 




sieves and strainers 










pots, pans, and molds 




Various materials and combinations of materials are used 
in the construction of pots, pans, and molds. Because form 
and function are closely related, it is important to choose 
the proper equipment for the task at hand. 


Pots made of copper transfer heat rapidly and 
evenly but because direct contact with copper will af¬ 
fect the color and consistency of many foods, copper 
pots are generally lined. (An exception is a copper pan 
used to cook jams, jellies, chocolates, and other high- 
sugar items, often known as a preserving pan.) Great 
care must be taken not to scratch linings made of soft 
metal such as tin. If the lining becomes scratched or 
wears away, it may be repaired by retinning. Copper also 
tends to discolor quickly; its proper upkeep requires 
significant time and labor. 


Cast iron has the capacity to hold heat well and 
transmit it very evenly. The metal is somewhat brittle 
and must be treated carefully to prevent pitting, scar¬ 
ring, and rusting. Cast iron coated with enamel is easier 
to clean but loses some of its nonstick properties and 
cannot withstand as high a temperature as untreated 
cast iron. Stainless steel is a relatively poor conductor 




of heat, but it is often used because it has other advan¬ 
tages, including easy maintenance. Other metals, such 
as aluminum or copper, are often sandwiched with stain¬ 
less steel to improve heat conduction. Stainless steel 
will not react with foods; for example, white 
sauces will remain pure white or ivory. 


Blue-steel, black-steel, pressed-steel, or rolled- 
steel pans are all prone to discoloration but transmit 
heat very rapidly. These pans are generally thin and are 
often preferred for sauteing foods. 


Aluminum is also an excellent conductor of heat. 
However, it is a soft metal that wears down quickly. 
When a metal spoon or whip is used to stir a white or 
light-colored sauce, soup, or stock in an aluminum pot, 
the food may take on a gray color. Aluminum also reacts 
with acidic foods. Anodized or treated aluminum tends 
not to react, and is one of the most popular metals for 
pots used in contemporary kitchens. 


Nonstick coatings on pans have some use in profes¬ 
sional kitchens, especially for restaurants that offer 
foods cooked with less fat and oil. However, these sur¬ 
faces are not as sturdy as metal linings. 




PROPER CARE AND CLEANING OF COPPER PANS 




This technique for cleaning and shining 
copper cookware has been used by chefs 
for many years and is still favored because 
it is fast, inexpensive, and efficient. Mix 
equal parts of flour and salt, and then add 
enough distilled white vinegar to form a 
paste. The vinegar will react with the cop¬ 
per to erase any discoloration caused by 
oxidation and heat. Amy other acid, such 
as lemon juice, would work equally well, 
but white vinegar is typically the most eco¬ 
nomical choice. The salt acts as a scouring 




agent, and the flour provides the binder. 
Coat copper surfaces completely with this 
paste, then vigorously massage them clean 
with a cloth. Clean the interior cooking 
surfaces as you would other pots and pans, 
with a gentle scouring pad and cleanser. 


NOTE: Delicate copper serving dishes 
and utensils should be cleaned with a com¬ 
mercial cream or polish without abrasives, 
to avoid scratching. 




56 




TOOLS AND INGREDIENTS IN THE PROFESSIONAL KITCHEN 








Stovetop Pots and Pans 




NAME(S) 


CHARACTERISTICS ' 


stockpot/marmite 


Large pot, taller than it is wide, with straight sides; may have a spigot 


saucepan 


Has straight or slightly flared sides and a single long handle 


sauce pot 


Similar to a stockpot in shape, although not as large; has straight sides and two 
loop handles 


rondeau 


Wide, fairly shallow pot with two loop handles. When made from cast iron, fre¬ 
quently known as a "griswold"; may have a single short handle rather than two loop 
handles. A brasier is similar; may be square instead of round 


sauteuse/saute pan 


Shallow skillet with sloping sides and a single long handle 


sautoir/fry pan 


Shallow skillet with straight sides and a single long handle 


omelet pan/ 
crepe pan 


Shallow skillet with very short, slightly sloping sides; most often made of rolled or 
blue steel 


bain-marie/double 


boiler 


Nesting pots with single long handle. "Bain-marie" also refers to stainless-steel 
containers used to hold food in a steam table 


griddle 


Flat with no sides; may be built directly into the stove 


fish poacher 


Long, narrow lidded pot with straight sides; includes a perforated rack for holding 
fish 


steamer 


Pair of stacked pots; lidded top pot has a perforated bottom. Also, bamboo basket 
with tight-fitting lid; can sit in a wok 




SEASONING PANS 




Chefs who use pans made of cast iron or 
rolled steel often season their pans to seal 
the pores. Seasoning preserves the cooking 
surface and essentially creates a nonstick 
coating. To season a pan, pour enough 
cooking oil into the pan to evenly coat the 
bottom to a depth of about Va in /6 mm. 
Place the pan in a 300°F/i49°C oven for 




one hour. Remove the pan from the oven 
and let it cool. Wipe away any excess oil 
with paper towels. Repeat the procedure 
every so often to renew the seal. To clean a 
seasoned pan, use a bundle of paper towels 
to scour salt over the surface of the pan un¬ 
til the food particles have been removed. 




chapters » EQUIPMENT IDENTIFICATION 




57 




pots, pans, and molds 


































pots and pans for stovetop cooking 


Pots and pans used on the stovetop may be made from 
a variety of materials, but they must be able to with¬ 
stand direct heat from a flame. A poorly produced pot 
will have weak spots and will warp. Pans may be made 
of many different materials, and selection in large part 
weighs on preference. Heat conductivity and evenness 
of heat transfer are important to consider as well as the 
maintenance of the pan; for example, copper is great 
for conductivity but requires significant time and labor 
for proper upkeep. Nonstick coatings may be useful for 




some applications, but these surfaces are not as sturdy 
as metal, so another choice for nonstick cookery would 
be cast iron. Blue-steel and black-steel, pressed-steel, 
or rolled-steel pans are often preferred for sauteing be¬ 
cause of their quick response to changes in temperature. 


When choosing a pot or pan, consider the following 
information: 


1. Choose a size appropriate to the food being cooked. 
Be familiar with the capacity of various pots, pans, and 
molds. If too many pieces of meat are crowded into a 
sauteuse, for instance, the food will not brown properly. 






TWO NESTED STAINLESS- 
STEEL SAUTEUSES 




58 




TOOLS AND INGREDIENTS IN THE PROFESSIONAL KITCHEN 
















If the sauteuse is too large, however, the fond (Maillard 
drippings from the meat) could scorch. If a small fish is 
poached in a large pot, the cuisson (cooking liquid) will 
not have the proper intensity of flavor. 


2. Choose material appropriate to the cooking tech¬ 
nique. Experience has shown, and science has verified, 
that certain cooking techniques are more successful 
when used with certain materials. For instance, sauteed 
foods require pans that transmit heat quickly and are sen¬ 
sitive to temperature changes. Braises, on the other hand, 
require long, fairly gentle cooking; it is more important 




that the pot transmit heat evenly and hold it well than 
respond rapidly to changes in heat. 


3. Use proper handling, cleaning, and storing tech¬ 
niques. Avoid subjecting pots to heat extremes and rapid 
changes in temperature (e.g., placing a smoking-hot pot 
into a sinkful of water) because some materials are prone 
to warping. Other materials may chip or even crack if al¬ 
lowed to sit over heat when they are empty or if they are 
handled roughly. Casseroles or molds made of enameled 
cast iron or steel are especially vulnerable. 






SAUTOIR WITH LID 




STOCKPOT WITH LID 




WOK 




FISH POACHER 




chapters » EQUIPMENT IDENTIFICATION 




59 




pots and pans for stovetop cooking 




































pans for oven cooking Pans used in 


ovens are produced from the same basic materials used 
to make stovetop pots and pans. Glazed and unglazed 
earthenware, glass, and ceramics are also used. The heat 
of the oven is less intense than that of a burner, making 
it possible to use these more delicate materials without 
risk of cracking or shattering. Metal pans are available 
in several gauges (gauge refers to the thickness of the 
metal). Heavy-gauge pans are usually preferred because 




they transfer heat more evenly. Regarding heat conduc¬ 
tivity, some metals heat faster than others. Aluminum 
heats quickly but is susceptible to burning food if it is a 
light gauge. On the other hand, stainless steel is a poor 
conductor of heat but works best for baking in a lighter 
gauge. Tin is a good conductor of heat, while materials 
such as glass, ceramic, and earthenware hold heat well 
but transfer it poorly. 




SPRINGFORMPAN 






STACKED FROM BOTTOM TO TOP: 


MUFFIN TIN, LOOSE-BOTTOMED TART PAN, 
CAKE PANS 




i 




BUNDTPAN 




6o 




TOOLS AND INGREDIENTS IN THE PROFESSIONAL KITCHEN 


















ROASTING PAN 








LOAF PAN 




GRATIN DISHES, RAMEKINS 
(NESTED IN THE GRATIN DISH) 




PULLMAN LOAF PAN 






FLEXIBLE SILICONE MOLD 




chapters » EQUIPMENT IDENTIFICATION 




61 




pots and pans for oven coo 


















































Oven Pans and Molds 




j NAME(S) 


CHARACTERISTICS 


COMMON USES 


roasting pan 


Rectangular pan with medium-high sides; 
comes in various sizes 


Roasting or baking 


sheet pan 


Very shallow rectangular pan; may be full 
or half size 


Baking; storage 


hotel pan/ 
steam table pan/ 
chafing dish 


Rectangular pans, available in a wide range 
of sizes. Chafing dishes and hotel pans are 
usually of standard sizes, so most of them 
will fit together properly 


Occasionally for preparing foods 
but more often to hold cooked 
foods in steam tables, hot boxes, 
or electric or gas steamers. Fre¬ 
quently used to hold meats being 
marinated and for refrigerated 
food storage 


pate mold 


Deep rectangular metal mold, usually has 
hinged sides to facilitate removal of the 
pate. Special shapes may be available 


Cooking pate en croute 


terrine mold 


May be rectangular or oval, with a lid. 
Traditionally earthenware, may also be 
enameled cast iron 


Cooking or molding terrines 


gratin dish 


Shallow oval baking dish; ceramic, enam¬ 
eled cast iron, or enameled steel 


Baking gratins 


ramekin 


Round, straight-sided ceramic dish; comes 
in various sizes 


Baking souffles; sometimes for 
molding frozen souffles; sauce cups; 
baked custard; baked or chilled pud¬ 
dings; gratins; and a variety of other 
uses 


timbale mold 


Small metal or ceramic mold 


Molding individual portions of 
foods 


flexible silicone mold 


Available in different sizes and shapes 


Forming foods into a variety of 
shapes; can be used at high tem¬ 
peratures and for freezing 


cake pan 


Straight sided; available in various sizes 
and shapes. Can be used in a water bath 


Baking cakes, cheesecakes, and 
some rolls 


springform pan 


Similar to cake pan, but with separate bot¬ 
tom. Sides have spring to release for easy 
removal 


Baking cakes 


loose-bottomed 
tart pan 


Shallow pan with removable bottom. Sides 
may be fluted or straight, and are gener¬ 
ally shorter than those of pie pans. May be 
round, rectangular, or square 


Baking tarts 




62 




TOOLS AND INGREDIENTS IN THE PROFESSIONAL KITCHEN 


































NAME(S) 


CHARACTERISTICS 


COMMON USES 


pie pan 


Round pan with flared sides; deeper than 
tart pan; available in a variety of sizes 


Baking pies and quiches 


loaf pan 


Deep pan, usually rectangular. Sides may 
be straight or slightly flared 


Baking breads and meatloaves 


Pullman loaf pan 


Rectangular pan with lid; produces flat- 
topped loaves 


Baking specialty bread 


muffin tin 


Pan with small, round depressions, which 
come in different sizes 


Baking muffins and cupcakes 


Bundt pan 


Deep, round pan with tube in the center. 


May have ornate shapes 


Creating a specific shape of cake, 
including chiffon and pound cakes 


tube pan 


Deep, round pan with straight sides and 
tube in the center. Some are similar to 
springform pans, with removable sides 


Baking angel food cake, pound 
cakes, or chiffon cakes 




chapter 5 » 




EQUIPMENT IDENTIFICATION 




63 




pots, pans, and molds 
























large equipment 




When working with large equipment, safety precautions 
must be observed and proper maintenance and cleaning 
done consistently. 


1. Obtain proper instruction in the machine's safe 
operation. 


2. First turn off and then unplug electrical equipment 
before assembling it or breaking it down. 


3. Use all safety features: Be sure that lids are secure, 
hand guards are used, and the machine is stable. 


4. Clean and sanitize the equipment thoroughly after 
each use. 


5. Be sure that all pieces of equipment are properly re¬ 
assembled and left unplugged after each use. 


6. Report any problems or malfunctions promptly, and 
alert coworkers to the problem. 


KETTLES AND STEAMERS 


Kettles and steamers enable a chef to prepare large 
amounts of food efficiently, since the heat is applied 
over a much larger area than is possible when a single 
burner is used. Cooking times are often shorter than 
when using the stovetop. 


STEAM-JACKETED KETTLE This freestanding 
or tabletop kettle circulates steam through the 
double-sided walls, providing even heat. Units 
vary; they may tilt, may be insulated, and may have 
spigots or lids. Available in a range of sizes, these 
kettles are excellent for producing stocks, soups, 
and sauces. 


TILTING KETTLE This large, relatively shallow 
freestanding unit (also known as a Swiss brasier, 
tilting skillet, or tilting fry pan) is used for braising, 
stewing, and sauteing large quantities of meats or 
vegetables at one time. Most tilting kettles have 
lids, allowing for steaming as well. 


PRESSURE STEAMER Water is heated under 
pressure in a sealed compartment, allowing it 
to reach temperatures above the boiling point, 
212°F/100°C. Cooking time is controlled by auto¬ 
matic timers, which open the exhaust valves at the 
end. 




CONVECTION STEAMER Steam is generated in a 
boiler, then piped to the cooking chamber, where 
it is vented over the food. Pressure does not build 
up in the unit; it is continuously exhausted, which 
means the door may be opened at any time without 
danger of scalding or burning. 


DEEP-FAT FRYER This consists of a gas or electric 
heating element and a large stainless-steel res¬ 
ervoir that holds the fat. A thermostat allows the 
user to control the temperature of the fat. Stain¬ 
less-steel wire mesh baskets are used to lower and 
lift foods into and out of the fat. 


RANGES AND OVENS 


The stovetop is known as the range; the oven is usually 
below the range. However, there are a number of varia¬ 
tions on this standard arrangement. Gas or electric 
ranges are available in many sizes and with different 
combinations of open burners, flattops (not to be con¬ 
fused with griddle units), and ring tops. Open burners 
and ring tops supply direct heat, which is easy to change 
and control. Flattops provide indirect heat, which is 
more even and less intense than direct heat. Foods that 
require long, slow cooking, such as stocks, are more 
effectively cooked on a flattop. Small units known as 
candy stoves or stockpot ranges have rings of gas jets 
or removable rings under a flattop, allowing for excel¬ 
lent heat control. Ovens cook foods by surrounding them 
with hot air, a gentler and more even source of heat than 
the direct heat of a burner. 


OPEN-BURNER RANGE This type of range has 
individual grate-style burners that allow for easy 
adjustment of heat. 


FLATTOP RANGE This consists of a thick plate of 
cast iron or steel set over the heat source. Flattops 
give relatively even and consistent heat but do not 
allow for quick adjustments of temperature. 


RING-TOP RANGE This is a flattop with plates that 
can be removed to widen the opening, supplying 
more or less heat. 


INDUCTION COOKTOP This relies on the magnetic 
attraction between the cooktop and steel or cast 
iron in the pan to generate heat. The cooktop itself 
remains cool. Reaction time is significantly faster 




6 4 




TOOLS AND INGREDIENTS IN THE PROFESSIONAL KITCHEN 




than for traditional burners. Pans containing cop¬ 
per or aluminum may not be used. 


CONVECTION OVEN Fans force hot air to circulate 
around the food, cooking it evenly and quickly. 
Some convection ovens have the capacity to intro¬ 
duce moisture. 


CONVENTIONAL/DECK OVEN The heat source is 
located on the bottom, underneath the deck (floor) 
of the oven. Heat is conducted through the deck 
to the cavity. Conventional ovens can be located 
below a range top or as separate shelves arranged 
one above another. The latter are known as deck 
ovens, and the food is placed directly on the deck 
instead of on a wire rack. Deck ovens normally 
consist of two to four decks, although single-deck 
models are available. 


COMBI OVEN This piece of equipment, powered by 
either gas or electricity, is a combination steamer 
and convection oven. It can be used in steam mode, 
hot-air convection mode, or heat/steam (combi) 
mode. 


MICROWAVE OVEN This oven uses electricity to 
generate microwave radiation, which cooks or re¬ 
heats foods very quickly. Some models double as 
convection ovens. 


GRIDDLES AND GRILLS 


Two other range/oven features, the griddle and the 


grill, are part of the traditional commercial foodservice 


setup. 


GRIDDLE Similar to a flattop range, a griddle has a 
heat source located beneath a thick plate of metal, 
generally cast iron or steel. The food is cooked di¬ 
rectly on the griddle surface. 


GRILL/BROILER/SALAMANDER In a grill, the 
heat source is located below a rack; in a broiler or 
salamander, the heat source is above. Some units 
have adjustable racks that allow the food to be 
raised or lowered to control cooking speed. Some 
grills bum wood, charcoal, or both, but units in 
restaurants are often either gas or electric fired, 
with ceramic “rocks" that create a bed of coals to 
produce the effect of a charcoal grill. Broilers radi¬ 
ate an intense heat from above and can be found 




as a setting in a gas or electric oven. If the broiler 
is contained as a separate unit, it is known as a 
salamander and is used primarily to finish or glaze 
foods. 




P 


i-i 


OTQ 


0 > 




SMOKERS 


A true smoker will treat foods with smoke and can be 
operated at either cool or hot temperatures. Smokers 
generally have racks or hooks that allow foods to smoke 
evenly. 


REFRIGERATION EQUIPMENT 


Maintaining adequate refrigerated storage is crucial to 
any foodservice operation; therefore, the menu and the 
storage must be evaluated and coordinated. All units 
should be maintained properly, which means regular and 
thorough cleaning. 


WALK-IN This is the largest style of refrigeration 
unit and usually has shelves arranged around the 
walls. It is possible to zone a walk-in to maintain 
appropriate temperature and humidity levels for 
storing various foods. Some walk-ins are large 
enough to accommodate rolling carts for addi¬ 
tional storage. Some have pass-through or reach-in 
doors to facilitate access to frequently required 
items. Walk-ins may be situated in the kitchen or 
outside the facility. 


REACH-IN A reach-in may be a single unit or part 
of a bank of units, available in many sizes. Units 
with pass-through doors are especially helpful for 
the pantry area, where cold items can be retrieved 
by the wait staff as needed. 


ON-SITE REFRIGERATION Refrigerated drawers 
or undercounter reach-ins allow ingredients to be 
held on the line at the proper temperature. 


PORTABLE REFRIGERATION A refrigerated cart 
can be placed as needed in the kitchen. 


DISPLAY REFRIGERATION Display cases are gen¬ 
erally used in the dining room for desserts, salads, 
or salad bars. 




chapters » EQUIPMENT IDENTIFICATION 




65 




equipment 




grinding, slicing, mixing, and pureeing equipment 


Grinders, slicers, and pureeing equipment all have the potential to be extremely 
dangerous. As these tools are essential for a number of operations, all chefs 
should be able to use them with confidence. 




FOOD PROCESSOR 






66 




TOOLS AND INGREDIENTS IN THE PROFESSIONAL KITCHEN 






















IMMERSION BLENDER 






BLENDER 




STANDING MIXER 
AND ATTACHMENTS 




chapters » EQUIPMENT IDENTIFICATION 




67 




grinding, slicing, mixing, and pureeing equipment 








































Grinding, Slicing, Mixing, and Pureeing Equipment 




NAME(S) 


CHARACTERISTICS 


COMMON USES j 


blender 


Consists of a base that houses the mo¬ 
tor and a removable lidded jar with a 
propeller-like blade in its bottom. Speed 
settings for motor are in base. Jars 
made of stainless steel, plastic, or glass; 
available in several capacities 


Excellent for pureeing, liquefying, 
and emulsifying foods 


food processor 


Motor housed in base, separately from 
removable bowl, blade, and lid. May have 
extra disks for specialized cutting 


Grinding, pureeing, blending, emul¬ 
sifying, crushing, and kneading. With 
special disks: slicing, julienning, and 
shredding 


immersion blender/ 
hand blender/stick 
blender/burr mixer 


Long, slender one-piece machine; like 
an inverted blender. Top houses mo¬ 
tor, which generally runs at only one 
speed. Plastic handle with on/off switch 
extends from top of housing. Stainless- 
steel driveshaft extends from motor and 
ends with blade, which is immersed in 
the food 


Pureeing, liquefying, and emulsifying 
large batches of food directly in the 
cooking vessel 


vertical chopping 
machine (VCM) 


Motor in base is permanently attached 
to bowl with integral blades. As a safety 
precaution, hinged lid must be locked in 
place before unit will operate 


Grinding, whipping emulsifying, 
blending, crushing large quantities 
of food 


food chopper/ 
buffalo chopper 


Food is placed in a rotating bowl that 
passes under a hood, where blades chop 
the food. Some have hoppers or feed 
tubes and interchangeable disks. Avail¬ 
able in floor and tabletop models 


Chopping large quantities of food; 
with special disks: slicing or grating 


food sheer/ 
meat slicer 


Carrier moves food back and forth 
against circular blade, generally made of 
carbon steel. Guard provides safety 


Slicing foods in even thicknesses 


mandoline 


Blades of high-carbon steel. Levers ad¬ 
just blades to achieve cut and thickness 
desired. Guard provides safety 


Slicing, julienning, cutting gaufrettes 
and batonnets 


stand mixer 


Electric machine has large detachable 
bowl of varying capacities (5-quart, 
10-quart, 20-quart, 40-quart, etc.). At¬ 
tachments: whip, paddle, dough hook. 


Bowl is locked in place and attachment 
rotates through batter or dough 


Mixing, beating, whipping, kneading 


meat grinder 


May be freestanding machine or attach¬ 
ment for a standing mixer. Should have 
disks of varying sizes; in general will 
have a feed tray and a pusher 


Grinding; stuffing sausage casings 
(with attachment) 




68 




TOOLS AND INGREDIENTS IN THE PROFESSIONAL KITCHEN