THE KITCHEN BRIGADE SYSTEM
The brigade system was instituted by Escoffier to streamline and simplify work in hotel kitchens. It served to eliminate the chaos and duplication of effort that could result when workers did not have clear-cut responsibilities. Under this system, each position has a station and defined responsibilities, outlined below. In smaller operations, the classic system is generally abbreviated and responsibilities are organized so as to make the best use of workspace and talents. A shortage of skilled personnel has also made modifications in the brigade system necessary. The introduction of new equipment has helped to alleviate some of the problems associated with smaller kitchen staff.


The chef is responsible for all kitchen operations, including ordering, supervision of all stations, and development of menu items. He or she also may be known as the chef de cuisine or executive chef. The sous chef is second in command, answers to the chef, may be responsible for scheduling, fills in for the chef, and assists the station chefs (or line cooks) as necessary. Small operations may not have a sous chef. The range of positions in a classic brigade also include the following:


The SAUTE CHEF (saucier) is responsible for all sauteed items and their sauces. This position is often considered the most demanding, responsible, and glamorous on the line.
The FISH CHEF (poissonier) is responsible for fish items and their sauces, often including fish butchering. This position is sometimes combined with the saucier position.


The ROAST CHEF (rotisseur) is responsible for all roasted foods and related jus or other sauces.


The GRILL CHEF (grillardin) is responsible for all grilled foods. This position may be combined with that of rotisseur.


The FRY CHEF (friturier) is responsible for all fried foods. This position may be combined with the rotisseur position.


The VEGETABLE CHEF ( entremetier) is responsible for hot appetizers and frequently has responsibility for soups, vegetables, and pastas and other starches. (In a full traditional brigade system, soups are prepared by the soup station or potager, and vegetables by the legumier.) This station may also be responsible for egg dishes.


The ROUNDSMAN ( tournant) or swing cook works as needed throughout the kitchen.


The COLD-FOODS CHEF (garde manger j, also known as the PANTRY CHEF, is responsible for preparation of cold foods including salads, cold appetizers, pates, and the like. This is considered a separate category of kitchen work.


The BUTCHER (boucher) is responsible for butch¬ ering meats, poultry, and occasionally fish. The boucher may also be responsible for breading meat and fish items.
The PASTRY CHEF (patissier) is responsible for baked items, pastries, and desserts. The pastry chef frequently supervises a separate kitchen area or a separate shop in larger operations. This posi¬ tion may be further broken down into the following areas of specialization:


CONFISEUR (prepares candies and petits fours),


BOULANGER (prepares unsweetened doughs, as for breads and rolls),
GLACIER (prepares frozen and cold desserts), and


DECORATEUR (prepares showpieces and special cakes).


The EXPEDITER or ANNOUNCER (aboyeur) accepts orders from the dining room and relays them to the various station chefs. This individual is the last person to see the plate before it leaves the kitchen. In some operations, this may be either the chef or sous chef.