MEASURING INGREDIENTS ACCURATELY
Accurate measurements are crucial to recipes. In order to keep costs in line and ensure consistency of quality and quantity, ingredients and portion sizes must be measured correctly each time a recipe is made.


Ingredients are purchased and used according to one of three measuring conventions: count, volume, or weight. They may be purchased according to one system and measured for use in a recipe according to another.


Count is a measurement of whole items as one would purchase them. The terms each, bunch, and dozen all indicate units of count measure. If the individual item has been processed, graded, or packaged according to established standards, count can be a useful, accurate way to measure ingredients. 


It is less accurate for ingredients requiring some advance preparation or without any established standards for purchasing. Garlic cloves illustrate the point well. If a recipe calls for two garlic cloves, the intensity of garlic in the dish will change depending upon whether the cloves you use are large or small.


Volume is a measurement of the space occupied by a solid, liquid, or gas. The terms teaspoon (tsp), tablespoon (tbsp), fluid ounce (fl oz), cup, pint (pt), quart (qt), gallon (gal), milliliter (mi), and liter (L) all indicate units of volume measure. 


Volume measurements are best suited to liquids, though they are also used for solids, especially spices, in small amounts. Tools used for measuring volume are not always as precise as necessary, especially if you must often increase or decrease a recipe. Volume measuring tools don't conform to any regulated standards. Therefore, the amount of an ingredient measured with one set of spoons, cups, or pitchers could be quite different from the amount measured with another set.


Weight is a measurement of the mass or heaviness of a solid, liquid, or gas. The terms ounce (oz), pound (lb), gram (g), and kilogram (kg) all indicate units of weight measure. Scales are used to measure weight, and they must meet specific standards for accuracy. In professional kitchens, weight is usually the preferred type of measurement because it is easier to attain accuracy with weight than it is with volume