nutrition basics


The first three are considered primary nutrients, while alcohol is not. Any food source that has a good supply of nutrients in relation to the number of calories it contains is considered nutrient dense.


CARBOHYDRATES
Carbohydrates provide energy for muscle movement and red blood cells, and play a role in the regulation of fat metabolism. Composed of smaller units known as simple carbohydrates and complex carbohydrates, these are necessary for the body to work efficiently and to fulfill its energy needs. Simple carbohydrates (generally sugars) are found in fruits and juices, dairy products, and refined sugars. Complex carbohydrates (generally starches) are found in plant-based foods such as grains, legumes, and vegetables. Foods containing complex carbohydrates are also usually good sources of other important components of a healthy diet, including vitamins and minerals.




Protein is a nutrient essential for the growth and main¬ tenance of body tissues, for hormone, enzyme, and antibody production, and for the regulation of bodily fluids. The basic building blocks are referred to as amino acids. There are nine essential amino acids that must be supplied through the diet because the body does not produce them. All protein-rich foods contain some or all of the nine.
Protein foods are categorized as either complete or incomplete, depending on the presence or lack of essential amino acids. A complete protein is a food that provides all nine amino acids in the correct ratio to support the production of other proteins by the adult human body. Meat, poultry, and fish are good sources of complete proteins.
Incomplete proteins, such as vegetables, grains, legumes, and nuts, do not contain all the essential amino acids. However, each of these foods contains some of the essential amino acids that, when combined with
other incomplete proteins can become complete proteins. When following a vegetarian diet, the following combinations offer a sample of non-meat-based complete proteins:
» Grains and legumes
» Lentils and rice
» Pasta and beans
» Tortillas and beans
» Tofu and rice
» Hummus and whole wheat pita




Fat is often a significant concern of those watching what they eat. While it is true that excess fat in the diet is unhealthy because it raises the risk of coronary heart disease, obesity, and certain cancers, fat is still an essential nutrient that provides energy and fulfills bodily functions.
Current dietary advice places emphasis on the type of fat as well as the amount of fat in the diet. Most of the daily intake of fat should come from mono- and polyunsaturated sources. Although consuming more than the recommended limit of fat is often associated with weight gain and obesity, excess total calories are the root of that problem.
Cholesterol is a fat-related compound; the two types are dietary and serum. Dietary cholesterol is only found in animal foods. Serum or blood cholesterol is found in the bloodstream and is essential to life. It is not necessary for adults to consume cholesterol, because the human body is capable of manufacturing all the cholesterol that it needs internally. Foods high in cholesterol tend to have high amounts of fat. Regardless of how many calories are consumed daily, it is recommended that cholesterol intake not exceed 300 milligrams.