Nutrition refers to the study of diet and health. It is through the 


Jr 


comprehension of this study that we as foodservice professionals can 


, 


accommodate and enrich diners’ dietary preferences afid restrictions. 
Meeting the dietary needs of today's lifestyles involves an understanding 
that people eat or don’t eat certain foods for different reasons. The 
concerns of customers have moved beyond just just flavor and texture 
of food and now extend to a healthy diet full of^nutritious high- 
quality foods. 


CHAPTER 3 




the basics of 
nutrition and 
food science 




nutrition basics 


Beyond offering flavorful options, the foodservice pro¬ 
fessional will benefit from understanding how energy 
and nutrients work. To begin, energy and nutrients are 
used for growth, maintenance, and repair of our bodies. 
Energy, counted in calories, comes from carbohydrates, 
protein, fat, and alcohol. The first three are considered 
primary nutrients, while alcohol is not. Any food source 
that has a good supply of nutrients in relation to the 
number of calories it contains is considered nutrient 
dense. 


CARBOHYDRATES 


Carbohydrates provide energy for muscle movement 
and red blood cells, and play a role in the regulation 
of fat metabolism. Composed of smaller units known 
as simple carbohydrates and complex carbohydrates, 
these are necessary for the body to work efficiently and 
to fulfill its energy needs. Simple carbohydrates (gener¬ 
ally sugars) are found in fruits and juices, dairy products, 
and refined sugars. Complex carbohydrates (generally 
starches) are found in plant-based foods such as grains, 
legumes, and vegetables. Foods containing complex 
carbohydrates are also usually good sources of other 
important components of a healthy diet, including vita¬ 
mins and minerals. 


PROTEIN 


Protein is a nutrient essential for the growth and main¬ 
tenance of body tissues, for hormone, enzyme, and 
antibody production, and for the regulation of bodily 
fluids. The basic building blocks are referred to as amino 
acids. There are nine essential amino acids that must 
be supplied through the diet because the body does not 
produce them. All protein-rich foods contain some or all 
of the nine. 


Protein foods are categorized as either complete 
or incomplete, depending on the presence or lack of 
essential amino acids. A complete protein is a food 
that provides all nine amino acids in the correct ratio to 
support the production of other proteins by the adult 
human body. Meat, poultry, and fish are good sources of 
complete proteins. 


Incomplete proteins, such as vegetables, grains, 
legumes, and nuts, do not contain all the essential amino 
acids. However, each of these foods contains some of 
the essential amino acids that, when combined with 




other incomplete proteins, can become complete pro¬ 
teins. When following a vegetarian diet, the following 
combinations offer a sample of non-meat-based com¬ 
plete proteins: 


» Grains and legumes 


» Lentils and rice 


» Pasta and beans 


» Tortillas and beans 


» Tofu and rice 


» Hummus and whole wheat pita 


FAT 


Fat is often a significant concern of those watching 
what they eat. While it is true that excess fat in the diet 
is unhealthy because it raises the risk of coronary heart 
disease, obesity, and certain cancers, fat is still an es¬ 
sential nutrient that provides energy and fulfills bodily 
functions. 


Current dietary advice places emphasis on the type 
of fat as well as the amount of fat in the diet. Most of 
the daily intake of fat should come from mono- and poly¬ 
unsaturated sources. Although consuming more than 
the recommended limit of fat is often associated with 
weight gain and obesity, excess total calories are the 
root of that problem. 


Cholesterol is a fat-related compound; the two 
types are dietary and serum. Dietary cholesterol is only 
found in animal foods. Serum or blood cholesterol is 
found in the bloodstream and is essential to life. It is not 
necessary for adults to consume cholesterol, because 
the human body is capable of manufacturing all the cho¬ 
lesterol that it needs internally. Foods high in cholesterol 
tend to have high amounts of fat. Regardless of how 
many calories are consumed daily, it is recommended 
that cholesterol intake not exceed 300 milligrams. 


VITAMINS AND MINERALS 


Needed in smaller quantities than protein, carbohy¬ 
drates, and fat, vitamins and minerals are noncaloric 
essential nutrients. Vitamins are classified as either 
water-soluble or fat-soluble. Water-soluble vitamins 
dissolve in water and are easily transported throughout 
the body in the bloodstream. Fat-soluble vitamins are 




24 




THE CULINARY PROFESSIONAL 




stored in fat tissues. Both forms of vitamins, as well 
as minerals, are found in many different food sources. 
Because no food contains every essential nutrient in the 
correct proportions and no single pill or supplement can 
compensate for a poor diet, eating a well-balanced diet 




composed of a variety of foods is the healthiest way to 
meet normal nutrient requirements. For a listing of vita¬ 
mins and minerals with their functions and food sources, 
refer to page 26. 




menu development and nutrition 




When the diet offers balanced nutrition, obtaining 
the necessary amount of energy and nutrients is easy. 
Although it is impossible to know what a customer 
has consumed before entering your establishment, by 
predicting the combinations of courses that your cus¬ 
tomers are likely to order, you can design your menus to 
ensure they receive delicious, nutritious, well-balanced 
meals. 


As the recommended dietary guidelines continue to 
change, one thing remains the same: portion control is 
essential to maintaining a healthy weight. Optimum por¬ 
tion size for any individual depends primarily on his or 
her daily caloric requirements based on age, size, build, 
and level of physical activity. Fats, oils, and sweets are 
suggested in very limited quantities. Offering a menu 
rich in grain products, vegetables, and fruits, low in fat, 
saturated fat, and cholesterol, and moderate in sugars, 
salt, and sodium will help customers follow a healthy 
plan. 


Because consumers have grown increasingly con¬ 
scious of the need to make well-balanced meal choices, 
the professional chef has been given the opportunity 
to make a difference. Developing healthy, flavorful, and 
satisfying menu items is both easy and worthwhile. 


The following is a set of principles developed for 
healthy cooking. The guidelines are meant as a reference 
for food selection, cooking techniques, and beverage of¬ 
ferings. They should be regarded as ways to explore the 
possibilities of flavor and healthy cooking. 


» Select nutrient-dense ingredients. 


» Store and prepare all foods with the aim of preserv¬ 
ing their best possible flavor, texture, color, and 
overall nutritional value. 




» Manage the amount of fat used both as an ingredi¬ 
ent and as part of a preparation or cooking tech¬ 
nique. 


» Serve appropriate portions of food. 


» Use salt with care and purpose. 


» Offer a variety of beverages, both alcoholic and 
nonalcoholic, that complement the food menu. 


HEALTHY SUBSTITUTIONS 


By making simple modifications to existing recipes, 
healthier versions are within reach. 




ORIGINAL 


legg 


Saute in butter 
1 cup mayonnaise 


1 cup sour cream 




1 cup heavy cream 




MODIFIED 
2 egg whites 
Sweat in broth/stock 


Vi cup mayonnaise plus V 2 cup 
nonfat yogurt 


1 cup nonfat yogurt plus 1 to 2 
tbsp buttermilk or lemon juice 
plus 1 tbsp flour per 8 oz yogurt 


1 cup evaporated skim milk 




Your establishment will find it rewarding to offer a 
variety of options. Continually striving to meet the ex¬ 
pectations of those who walk through your door should 
be an ongoing challenge for you and your staff. Consult 
The Culinary Institute of America's Techniques of 
Healthy Cooking for a more thorough discussion of nu¬ 
trition, innovative recipes, and specialized techniques. 




» Incorporate a variety of plant-based dishes in all 
categories of the menu. 




chapters » THE BASICS OF NUTRITION AND FOOD SCIENCE 




25 




VITAMINS AND MINERALS: THEIR FUNCTIONS & COMMON SOURCES 




WATER-SOLUBLE VITAMINS 


Name: B-complex (thiamin, riboflavin, niacin, 
folate, biotin, pantothenic acid, B 6 , B 12 ) 


Function: Allow for proper release of energy in 
the body 


Food Source: Grains; legumes; vegetables; animal 
protein (B 12 only found in animal foods) 


Name: Vitamin C 


Function: Increases body’s absorption of iron; 
aids in growth and maintenance of body tissue; 
boosts immune system; contains antioxidant 
properties 


Food Source: Fruits and vegetables (berries, 
melons, tomatoes, potatoes, green leafy 
vegetables) 


FAT-SOLUBLE VITAMINS 


Name: Vitamin A 


Function: Aids in proper vision, bone growth, 
reproduction, cell division and differentiation; 
regulates immune system; maintains surface 
linings 


Food Source: Animal protein such as liver and 
eggs; the precursor—beta carotene—is found 
in orange, deep yellow, and dark green leafy 
vegetables 


Name: Vitamin D 


Function: Aids in proper bone formation 
Food Source: Milk; some cereal and breads; fatty 
fish; egg yolks 


Name: Vitamin E 


Function: Protects body from damage by free 
radicals; contains antioxidant properties 
Food Source: Nuts; seeds; seed oils; avocados; 
sweet potatoes; green leafy vegetables 


Name: Vitamin K 


Function: Aids in proper blood clotting 


Food Source: Dark green leafy vegetables such as 


spinach, kale, broccoli 




MINERALS 


Name: Calcium (body’s most abundant mineral) 
Function: Used in the development of bones and 
teeth; regulates blood pressure; aids in muscle 
contraction, transmission of nerve impulses, and 
clotting of the blood 


Food Source: Dairy products (milk, yogurt); 
broccoli; green leafy vegetables 


Name: Phosphorus 


Function: Plays a key role in energy-releasing 
reactions; used in conjunction with calcium for 
maintaining bones and teeth 
Food Source: Animal protein; nuts; cereals; 
legumes 


Name: Sodium and potassium (electrolytes) 
Function: Aid in the regulation of bodily 
functions; help to maintain the body’s normal 
fluid balance; involved in nerve and muscle 
functions 


Food Source: Sodium is plentiful in many foods; 
potassium is found in virtually all fruits and 
vegetables 


Name: Magnesium 


Function: Promotes healthy teeth and bones, 
muscle contractions, nerve transmission, and 
bowel functions 


Food Source: Green vegetables; nuts; legumes; 
whole grains 


Name: Fluoride 


Function: Helps to prevent tooth decay; may help 
to prevent osteoporosis 


Food Source: Community water; saltwater fish; 
shellfish; tea 


Name: Iodine 


Function: Essential for the normal functioning of 
the thyroid gland; helps to regulate metabolism, 
cellular oxidation, and growth 
Food Source: Table salt; cod; grains 


Name: Iron 


Function: Helps to carry oxygen from the lungs to 
cells; involved in cellular energy metabolism 
Food Source: Liver and red meat; whole grains; 
legumes; green leafy vegetables; dried fruit