regulations, inspection, and certification 




Federal, state, and local government regulations work 
to ensure the wholesomeness of the food that reaches 
the public. Any new foodservice business should contact 
the local health department well in advance of opening 
to ascertain necessary legal requirements. Some states 
and local jurisdictions offer sanitation certification 
programs. Regulations and testing vary from area to 
area. Certification is often available through certain 
academic institutions. 


THE OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH 
ADMINISTRATION (OSHA) 


OSH A is a federal organization, instituted in 1970, 
that falls under the purview of the Health and Human 
Services Administration. Its regulations help employers 
and workers establish and maintain a safe, healthy work 


drugs and alcohol in the 


One final topic that is of great importance in the work¬ 
place is the right of all workers to be free from the 
hazards posed by a coworker who comes to work under 
the influence of drugs or alcohol. The abuse of any sub¬ 
stance is a serious concern because it can alter or impair 
one's ability to perform his or her job. Reaction times 




environment. Among OSHA's regulations is the mandate 
that all places of employment must have an adequate 
and easily accessible first-aid kit on the premises. In 
addition, if any organization has more than ten employ¬ 
ees, records must be kept of all accidents and injuries 
to employees that require medical treatment. OSHA 
concentrates its efforts on providing services where the 
risk to worker safety is greatest. 


AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT (ADA) 


This act is intended to make public places accessible 
and safe for those with a variety of disabilities. Any new 
construction or remodeling done to a restaurant must 
meet ADA standards. This includes locating telephones 
so that a person in a wheelchair can reach them and pro¬ 
viding toilets with handrails. 


workplace 


are slowed, inhibitions are lowered, and judgment is 
impaired. The responsibilities of a professional working 
in any kitchen are too great to allow someone suffering 
from a substance abuse problem to diminish the respect 
and trust you have built with your customers and staff. 




chapter 4 » FOOD AND KITCHEN SAFETY 




39 










id ingredients in 
'essional kitchen