STANDARDIZED RECIPES
The recipes used in each professional kitchen are known as standardized recipes. Unlike published recipes, standardized recipes are tailored to suit the needs of an individual kitchen. 


Preparing well-written and accurate standardized recipes is a big part of the professional chefs work in all foodservice settings, as they include much more than just ingredient names and preparation steps. 


Standardized recipes establish total yields, portion sizes, holding and serving practices, and plating information, and they set standards for cooking temperatures and times. These standards help to ensure consistent quality and quantity, permit chefs to monitor the efficiency of their work, and reduce costs by eliminating waste.


They also allow the wait staff to become familiar with a dish so they can answer guests' questions accurately and honestly. 


For example, the type of oil used in a dish may matter very much to a guest if it is an oil to which he or she has an allergy.


Standardized recipes can be recorded by hand, or electronically They should be recorded in a consistent, clear, easy-to-follow form.


   Need to be readily accessible to all staff members. Instruct kitchen staff to follow standardized recipes to the letter unless instructed otherwise, and encourage service staff to refer to standardized recipes when a question arises about ingredients or preparation methods.


As you prepare a standardized recipe, be as precise and consistent as you can. Include as many of the following elements as possible:


» Name/title of the food item or dish


» Yield information, expressed as one or more of the following: total weight, total volume, total number of portions


» Portion information for each serving, expressed as one or more of the following: a specific number of items (count), volume, weight


» Ingredient names, expressed in appropriate detail, specifying variety or brand as necessary


» Ingredient measures, expressed as one or more of the following: count, volume, weight


» Ingredient preparation instructions, sometimes included in the ingredient name, sometimes expressed in the method itself as a step


» Equipment information for preparation, cooking, storing, holding, and serving


» Preparation steps detailing mise en place, cooking methods, and temperatures for safe food handling (see Hazard Analysis Critical Control Points [HACCP], page 36)


» Service information, describing how to finish and plate a dish, add side dishes, sauces, and garnishes, if any, and listing the proper service temperatures


» Holding and reheating information, describing procedures, equipment, times, and temperatures for safe storage


» Critical control points (CCPs) at appropriate stages in the recipe to indicate temperatures and times for safe food-handling procedures during storage, preparation, holding, and reheating